ACT: Pakistan Penal Code, 1860
SECTION/ARTICLE: 464
TITLE: Making a false document:
CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION
============================================================

Making a false document:
A person is said to make a false document:
First:
Who dishonestly or fraudulently makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part
of a document, or makes any mark denoting the execution of a document, with the
intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of a document was made,
signed, sealed or executed by the authority of a person by whom or by whose authority he
knows that it was not made, signed, sealed or executed, or at a time at which he knows
that it was not made, signed, seated or executed; or
Secondly:
Who, without lawful authority, dishonesty or fraudulently, by cancellation or
otherwise, alters a document in any material part thereof, after it has been made "or
executed either by himself or by any other person, whether such person be living or dead
at the time of such alteration; or
Thirdly:
Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or later
a document, knowing that such person by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication
cannot, or that. by reason of deception practised upon him, he does not know the contents
of the document or the nature of the alteration.
Illustrations
(a)
A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,0OO, written by Z. A, in order to defraud
E, adds a cipher to the 10,000 and makes the sum 10,000, intending that it may be
believed by B that Z so wrote the letter, A has committed forgery.
(b)
A, without Z's authority, affixes Z's seal to a document purporting to be a conveyance
of an estate from Z to A, with the intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of
obtaining from B the purchase-money. A has committed forgery.
(c)
A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any sum
having been inserted in the cheque. A fraudulently tills up the cheque by inserting the sum
of ten thousand rupees. A commits forgery.
(d)
A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without inserting the
sum payable and authorises B to fill up the cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten
thousand rupees for the purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the
cheque by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery.
(e)
A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B's authority, intending
to discount it as. a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up the bill on its
maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to
suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of
forgery.
(f)
Z's will contains these words: "I direct that all my remaining property be equally divided
between A, B and C." A dishonestly scratches out B's name, intending that it may be
believed that the whole was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery.
(g)
A endorses a Government promissory-note and makes it payable to Z or his order by
writing on the bill the words "Pay to Z or his order" and signing the endorsement. B
dishonestly erases the words "Pay to Z or his order" and thereby converts the special
endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery.
(h)
A sells and conveys an estate to Z, A afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his estate'
executes a conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of
the conveyance to Z, Intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the estate to B
before he conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.
(i)
Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee from the legatee
named by Z, and by representing to Z, that he has prepared the will according to his
instructions, Induces Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j)
A writes a letter and signs it with B's name without B's authority, certifying that A is a
man of good character and distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune,
intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as A
made false document in order to induce Z to part with property, A has committed forgery.
(k)
A without B's authority writes a letter and signs it in B's name certifying to A's
character, intending thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed forgery
inasmuch as he intended to deceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to
enter into an express or implied contract for service.
Explanation 1: A man's signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
Illustrations
(a)
A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that the
bill was drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery.
(b)
A writes the word "accepted" on a piece of paper and sings it with Z's name, in order
that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and
negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B,
knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of
forgery.
(c)
A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same
name A endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was
endorsed by the person to whose order it was payable, here A has committed forgery.
(d)
A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B after the seizure
of the estate, in collusion With Z, executes a lease of the estate to Z at a nominal rent and
for a long period and dates the lease six months prior to the seizure, with intent to defraud
A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease was granted before the seizure. S, though
he executes the lease in his own name, commits forgery by antedating it.
(e)
A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A's benefit, and with
intent to defraud his creditors and in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a
promissory-note binding himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates that
note, intending that it may be believed to have been made before A was on the point of
insolvency. A has committed forgery under the first head of the definition.
Explanation 2: The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious person,
intending it to be believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of
a deceased person, intending it to be believed that the document was made by the person
in his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
Illustration
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in the
name of such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.
